# Supplementary Materials
## Methods
### Recount3 tissues used
The tissues used from Recount3 were blood, breast, stem cell, cervix, brain, kidney, umbilical cord, lung, epithelium, prostate, liver, heart, skin, colon, bone marrow, muscle, tonsil, blood vessel, spinal cord, testis, and placenta.

## Results 

### Signal removal
While it's possible to remove signal in the full dataset or the train and validation sets independantly, we decided to do the latter.
We made this decision because we observed potential data leakage when removing signal from the full dataset in one go (supp. fig. @fig:signal-leakage).

![                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Full dataset signal removal in a dataset without signal
](./images/no_signal_sim_signal_removed.svg "Signal removal from data with no signal to begin with"){#fig:split-signal-correction} 

### Scikit-learn logistic regression
The Pytorch logistic regression implementation we used was designed to be as close to the neural network implementations as possible to ensure the models were comparable.
Accordingly, we were optimizing for similarity of implementation instead of maximal performance.
Scikit-learn, on the other hand, optimizes their models to have the best out-of-box performance they can manage.
We found that scikit-learn's logistic regression generally outperformed the Pytorch logistic regression, which is a known problem (https://discuss.pytorch.org/t/logistic-regression-implemented-using-pytorch-performs-worse-than-sklearns-logistic-regression/52447).

### Recount3 Pretraining Figure
![                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Performance of Recount3 multiclass prediction with pretraining
](./images/recount_pretraining.svg "Pretraining"){#fig:pretrain} 

### Samplewise splitting
![                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Performance of Recount3 multiclass prediction with samplewise train/val splitting
](./images/recount_multiclass_sample_split.svg ){#fig:splitting}
